---
layout: post
current: post
cover: chain.jpg
title: The significance of mTLS and why you should care about it
date: 2019-09-09 08:00:00
category: [thoughts, news, tutorials]
author: Fiona McAllister
tags: [open source]
class: post-template
---
## Introduction

**Note** there are some [tutorials](#tutorials) within this article. These vary in difficulty. All require a linux distribution to be compatible with our agent.1

Cybersecurity is an ever-growing, ever-complicating field. As a new developer, it can be daunting to think of where to start. Here we're going to talk a little about mTLS and why you as a developer should care about it (and implement it!). 

mTLS is just a type of TLS (Transport Layer Security). This is commonly found in verifying endpoints and for encrypting communications (think of WhatsApp messages) and also browsers (https is a sign of a TLS controlled website). The https part of the url verifies the identity of the server, the webiste you're accessing, to you, the client. Unlike a password which is manually entered by a single user, TLS is typically managed by cryptographic certificates. Most TLS protocols usually verify this with an x509 certificate; and it's typically the client requesting a valid certificate from the server (DNS name on server must match that of the certificate). Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) security is based off this principle (and https is its successor).

The main thing that makes mTLS different (and arguably more secure) is that it requires *both* the server and client to verify each other: a handshake. This is particularly useful in instances where you want two servers to communicate with each other; or in a scenario where *you* are the server, not the client. Ultimately it's flexible and lightweight being perfect for edge devices.

This might still seem a bit overcomplicated. At WoTT we have our own dedicated Certificate Authority and examples of using the CA to secure mTLS connections. We encourage you to try it out to familiarise yourself with the concept. Additionally, our agent is lightweight and can be used flexibly on servers and other edge devices.  

## <a name = "tutorials"> </a> How to implement mTLS: some tutorials by WoTT

There are actually several different ways to implement an mTLS style security layer for security. We have several examples for you to try and implement yourself of varying difficulties.

### Easy 

We have a very simple to implement tutorial showing how you can use mTLS to secure a basic Web Application using WoTT's agent as a manager. See [here]({{site.url}}blog/tutorials/2019/06/16/simple-webapp) for more details.

### Medium

If you're familiar with Nginx servers, we have a useful tutorial to help guide you through setting up mTLS on it using our CA. See [here]({{site.url}}blog/tutorials/2019/07/15/mtls-with-nginx)

### Hard

(Recommended after following Nginx tutorial) you may want to up the ante if you have a Kubernetes cluster you want to secure. If you want to dive into securing Kubernetes with mTLS using WoTT, go [here](}}site.url}}blog/tutorials/2019/07/18/edge-to-kubernetes)

The important thing to take away is that you need a Certificate Authority from which to configure your system to. WoTT provides one for you. All these examples are designed to be adaptable so feel free to modify them at your will. If you don't feel a particular need to know how mTLS actually works, feel free to just skip to the [end](#conclusions) or explore the rest of WoTT. We have several [other articles]({{site.url}}blog/tutorials) on how to use our agent with your system.

## How it works

After all that you may still be interested in how mTLS actually works.
First of all, mTLS is configurable. It is up to the server and client to decide which certificates are considered 'trustworthy.' In the examples that we provided, we set up the system in a way to trust only WoTT provided certificates; but you absolutely can modify this to include other CA provided certifcates. It is up to the developer's discretion. 

But how does it actually work? We've mentioned already the 'handshake' as a concept, but this is actually the name given to the technology TLS uses. The TLS handshake protocol can be found [here](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc5246.txt) but it's long and wordy. What's important to know is that the TLS protocol is part of a layered structure and is sat between the transport (also known as TCP) and application layers.

{% asset blog/tls-structure.png srcset:width="1300 2x" srcset:width="650 1x" alt="Breakdown of the TLS structure" %}

The protocol/handshake layer is where the cryptographic 'magic' takes place. It manages the encryption algorithm used (also known as cipher) and key exchange, usually known as PKI (public key infrastructure). The PKI is signed for by the Certificate Authority and is what gives an endpoint its cryptographic identity. Basically, an x509 certificate is generated by this handshake protocol based off of the technologies each endpoint is using and then these certificates verified by the appropriate CA. With mTLS, it's the exact same except both the server and client verify each other. You can think of the CA as a signiature vouching for a device's identity.

## Why you should care?

For a start, it's probably the most common thing used since SSL became outdated. Several companies use mTLS. For example Skype uses it to secure business servers; and Cloudflare has options to employ mTLS. It's particularly important in cases where you want encrypted, secure traffic in *both* directions. Many devices now do not use logins (such as IoT devices) meaning that they would either be blocked from accessing a resource, or access a resource insecurely. Using mTLS is a way to provide an identity to a device/server that can be cryptographically verified. In other words, it's a way of making your resources more flexible and available whilst still being secure.

It's also a good way for you to secure yourself if you intend on being a server provider. Much of how internet security is done currently is verifying a server from a given client, it's a lot harder to protect yourself as the server. Usernames and passwords are an option, but they are exploitable and unreliable. More and more there is a need to move away from such technologies and start using cryptographic signage to identify trustworthy devices. Of course, no technology is perfect. TLS is updated frequently to counter this and it is the developer's responsibility to choose trusted CAs. For now, mTLS is a strong, lightweight method of securing your server and client endpoints.

## <a name = "conclusions"> </a> Conclusions

To summarise, mTLS is just a modified version of TLS (Transport Layer Security). It uses the same protocols and technologies, it's just a two-way verification instead of one (for example accessing a https link is simple TLS security). 

mTLS is the best option we have currently to protect servers from fraudulent devices and is an absolute must when dealing with certain tech domains like IoT. Many IoT breaches to date have been due to unencrypted traffic that doesn't protect the server (and leads to entire networks being brought down). There's also no real excuse *not* to implement it. All you need is a CA and here at WoTT we provide that for you as well as other features to help you manage and keep track of your devices. For example, you can control through our agent which device certificates you want to trust on individual endpoints giving you the freedom to make your server as flexible or secure as you need. Our agent gives you a high level view and capabilities to manage your devices in a user-friendly and visual way. 

If you're not quite ready to move to mTLS fully, let's at least make sure you've secured your devices to the best of your ability. Why not do a [CVE scan]({{site.url}}/blog/tutorials/2019/11/04/cve) while you're here to get a feel for how secure your endpoints actually are. WoTT is lightweight and can be installed on a variety of linux based devices from servers to raspberry pis. Until then, feel free to familiarise yourself with our agent and mTLS examples. 