---
layout: post
current: post
cover: FTP.jpg
title: Why you shouldn't be using FTP in 2020
date: 2020-02-01 17:00:00
category: tutorials
author: Fiona McAllister
tags: [open-source]
class: post-template
---

## Introduction

For many services, it is not enough to establish a connection. There are instances where a developer might want to transfer files from one server to another. FTP (File Transfer Protocol) is one of many available file transfer protocols that are available to use for servers. It enables the transfer of files from one machine or server to another over the internet. FTP runs on top of the TCP protocol and therefore uses the same core principles to establish and maintain a connection. The problem with this is that FTP (and TCP) are now almost 50 years old. 

Since the development of FTP and TCP in the 1970s, cybersecurity has become a growing concern. FTP does not encrypt the data it transfers, but rather keeps them as plaintext. TCP as a communication mode does not have any inbuilt encryption tools, so the security element needs to be derived from the FTP layer. This means that even if you use a username and password over FTP, your data can still be compromised. Here we'll underline why exactly FTP is insecure and alternatives that you can use to keep your data, especially your credentials, secure.

**Reading time: 5 min**

## What is FTP and why is it insecure?

FTP is a system that allows for the transfer of data and files between two systems, a server and a client. The server acts as a data store that the client can access and exchange files between and usually uses port 21. It was developed in the 1970s by Abhay Buhshan as a means to transfer files over the TCP/IP protocol. At the time, it was revolutionary, allowing a user to remotely access data. However, this was back when computers were simpler and text-based and it didn't take into account security, at least not from a hacker's perspective. 

FTP now is a fairly redundant mode of file transfer. It is inefficient, and although it has been updated somewhat over the years, it is still an old protocol lacking in security. The problem lies in the fact that many applications still use FTP today, despite support being phased out by various distributors including the [Debian Project](https://www.debian.org/News/2017/20170425). 

But why is it insecure? On the surface, it looks as though FTP can be secured through username and password. However, this isn't really the case, or rather it's not strictly speaking secure. This is in part because standard FTP doesn't actually *encrypt* its data. Any authentication data is transferred as a plaintext file making it particularly vulnerable to sniffing. In other words, an attacker could 'listen' to (sniff) your packets, gaining information regarding your login credentials. This is because of the plaintext format, your username and password can be easily read and used to breach your system. Beyond this as well is the fact that many FTP servers are no longer maintained, or have not been sufficiently updated to be secure today. 

This begs the question: why is FTP still used? Primarily because it's good for large quantities of data and is easily automated. but mostly because it is free and open source. In instances where security isn't a priority, FTP can be good enough, but unfortunately it is still being used in instances where data protection should be of [utmost importance](https://www.healthcareitnews.com/news/205000-patient-records-exposed-misconfigured-ftp-server). 
Fortunately, there is growing movement away from FTP servers, especially as support is discontinued by many vendors and organizations. That isn't to say that FTP is dying, the protocol itself is still useful, but it is important to secure the data within it as neither standard FTP or TCP have a means to encrypt. Fortunately, it is possible to secure FTP using alternative methods by using means to encrypt the data within.

## Alternatives to FTP 

There are actually several methods to transfer files over the internet, including HTTPS and AS2, however as alternatives to FTP there are really only 2 of interest: SFTP and FTPS. Both are known as 'Secure FTP' as they both use the FTP protocol, but actually encrypt the data being transferred.

### SFTP

SSH File Transfer Protocol (SFTP) encompasses the same principle as FTP in that it is a file transfer protocol, but uses a secure connection instead. 
SFTP uses the the SSH protocol to secure traffic and listens on port 22 because that is the port that SSH is typically configured to. It is possible to reconfigure SFTP to listen on different ports, but arguably one of its advantages that it's easier to protect via firewalls due to the use of a single port. 
To put it simply, SFTP is secure because SSH is secure. SSH is used in several infrastructures and as a result is under heavy scrutiny. 
For FTP uses, SSH makes it harder to sniff data packets. Data is not contained in plaintext files in this mode, and commands are kept separate to the file it is associated to leading to faster connections and making it harder to intercept by an attacker.

**Key things to know about SFTP:**

 * Uses encryption during data transmission. This makes the data incredibly difficult/near impossible to decipher.
 * Supports public key authentication. Impervious to brute force attacks and is a secure way of identifying users of the network.
 * Uses data integrity and authenticity checks. This verifies that the contents of the original file are unchanged and that they came from a legit source.
 * Host Authentication. This enables clients to verify whether or not the server they are connecting to is the one they intended.


### FTPS

FTP Secure (FTPS) is slightly different. FTPS is essentially FTP that has been updated to be more secure using SSL encryption. The primary issue with FTP is that conversations between client and server are not secure. 
Where possible, FTPS should use TLS to secure these conversations so that they are harder to attack. TLS is favored over SSL given that it is built upon SSL and is considered a more secure, improved version of it. 
FTPS verifies the connection based either off certificates (cryptographic identity), or credentials. The benefit with using certificates is you can use a CA to verify a certificate and ensure that your connection is secure. Credentials are still 'hackable.' However, because of this, FTPS uses multiple ports. This is arguably less secure, or harder to control, as there are more ports to control behind firewalls and therefore more avenues of attack.
Additionally, FTPS can be run in explicit or implicit mode. When a connection occurs through port 990, this is considered implicit as port 990 is employed in SSL communications as a whole. If using port 21, this is explicit and user **must** provide some authentication using `AUTH` SSL or TLS. 

**Key things to know about FTPS:**

 * FTPS uses certificates to encrypt communication (similar to public key authentication). Certain tools allow certificates to be requested and created.
 * When a trusted certificate authority signs these certificates, it acts as an ensurer that the client is being connected to a trusted and secure server. This can prevent a Man-in-the-Middle attack.
 * Learn more about FTPS [here](https://www.serv-u.com/solutions/what-is-file-transfer-protocol-secure).


## Our recommendations

At WoTT, we recommend using SFTP over FTPS if you are getting used to the system, although both are adequate. This is because SFTP is easier to control behind a firewall. WoTT provides a firewall tool so that you can easily see what connections you have on your network.

However, FTPS is a much more valuable tool for larger businesses and TLS is arguably the more secure protocol given that it can use cryptographic identity which we at WoTT can provide through our CA. 

We can recommend the following servers:

 * [proftpd](http://proftpd.org) for FTPS
 * [vsftpd](https://help.ubuntu.com/community/vsftpd) for FTPS (preferred)
 * [FileZilla](https://wiki.filezilla-project.org/Main_Page) for SFTP and FTPS

All 3 are open source and easily configurable.

The biggest take away you should have by the end of this however is that FTP is insecure and outdated and that it is bad practice to use it today. In instances where you do not need security or passwords, it can be effective given that it is free, open source, and easy to implement. However, for any security-conscious developer, we would suggest moving towards more secure FTP options such as FTPS and SFTP depending on your needs.


